Lab Assignment 6 (CS328 only): A url-shortening service
=======================================================

In this assignment you will be creating a small url-shortening and bookmarking service. The idea of this service is as follows:

- Users can create "buckets". Buckets are identified by either a custom-provided character string (if the user provides one when they create them) or a random 6-character string like `4A23GG`. Buckets can also have a description of what kinds of "links" they are meant to contain.
- A bucket is a container for links. Users can add links to a bucket, and either provide a shortcut for them or have a randomly generated shortcut. For example, if a user has a bucket with id `4A23GG`, then they can ask to add to this bucket the link `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_mountains_by_elevation` with "name" `wikiMountains`. Then someone accessing the site `<ourService>/4A23GG/wikiMountains` will be *redirected* to that wikipedia page.

## Submission information

You can get the start files for this project by "cloning" the repository at `https://github.com/skiadas/linky.git`. There are start files there for you to work with. You can clone this repository by going to an appropriate location in your terminal, and run the commands:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/skiadas/linky.git
cd linky
```

Here are the files included in this folder, named `linky`:

- A file that handles your database calls: `db.py` or some similar name.
- A file that handles the web service stuff: `main.py` or some similar name.
- A file that contains test calls: `tests.py` or something similar.

When you are ready to submit your assignment, you should create a zip file of the `linky` folder, and email it to me. To create a zip file you can go to the *parent* directory of the linky folder in the terminal, and run the command:
```bash
zip -r yourFavoriteName.zip linky
```

## Database requirements

Your database file should follow the structure of the sample `db.py`, and use ORM to introduce needed classes, followed by a `Db` class that represents a connection to the database. A start on these has been done for you. Here are the classes you should have:

- `Shortcut` is a class representing a link's shortcut. It contains the following table fields:
    - `linkHash` is of `String` type, and must not be null. It is a primary key, together with the `bucketId`.
    - `bucketId` is of `String` type, and must also not be null. It is a primary key, together with the `hash`. It is also a foreign key pointing to the bucket id field. When a bucket is deleted, all the corresponding shortcuts that were stored in it must also be deleted, so make sure to set the `ondelete` setting correctly.
    - `link` is of `String` type, and must be not null.
    - `description` is of `String` type, it is allowed to be nullable.

    The `Shortcut` class also has a relationship `bucket` to the `Bucket` class, whose opposite via `back_populates` is `shortcuts`.
- `Bucket` is a class representing a bucket of links. It contains the following table fields:
    - `id` is of `String` type, must not be null, and is the primary key.
    - `description` is of `String` type, and it is allowed to be nullable.
    - `passwordHash` is of `String` type, and must be not null.

    The` Bucket` class also has a relationship `shortcuts` with the `Shortcut` class, whose opposite via `back_populates` is `bucket`.

**Tasks, part 1**: Add the suitable lines to `db.py` to set up the above classes.
**Tasks, part 2**: Your `Db` class should provide at least the following methods (there are tests provided for these methods in the `tests.py` file, make sure you can pass those tests, and you should add your own as well):

1. A method `getBuckets(self)` that returns a list of all buckets in the system. The result should be a (possibly empty) list of `Bucket` objects.
2. A method `addBucket(self, id, passwordHash, description=None)` that can be used to create a new bucket in the database. The method should return the created bucket object. This method does NOT need to check if a bucket with that id already exists, that's the job of its caller.
3. A method `getBucket(self, id)` that is given a bucket id and searches in the database for a bucket with that id. Returns either the `Bucket` object with that id, or `None`.
4. A method `deleteBucket(self, bucket)` that can be used to delete an existing bucket. It expects to be given a `bucket` object, and deletes it from the database.
5. A method `addShortcut(self, linkHash, bucket, link, description=None)` which creates a new shortcut entry in the database. It expects to take a `shortcut` string, a `Bucket` object, a `link` string and optionally a `description` string. It does NOT need to check if an entry with the same primary keys exists, that's the job of its caller.
6. A method `getShortcut(self, linkHash, bucket)` that searches for a shortcut with a given hash string and belonging to a given bucket, and returns it if one exists (or returns `None` otherwise).
7. A method `deleteShortcut(self, shortcut)` that is given a `Shortcut` object and deletes it.

## Web Service requirements

You will implement the following web service routes (details on them follow):

Route Scheme                    Function Name               Role
------------------------------- --------------------------- -----------------------------
`GET '/'`                       bucket_list                 List of all buckets
`GET '/<bucketId>'`             bucket_contents             Contents of a bucket
`POST '/'`                      bucket_create               Create a new bucket
`PUT '/<bucketId>'`             bucket_create_with_id       Create a new bucket
`DELETE '/<bucketId>'`          bucket_delete               Delete a bucket
`GET '/<bucketId>/<hash>'`      shortcut_get_link           Get a shortcut link
`POST '/<bucketId>/<hash>'`     shortcut_create             Create a shortcut link
`PUT '/<bucketId>/<hash>'`      shortcut_create_with_hash   Create a shortcut link
`DELETE '/<bucketId>/<hash>'`   shortcut_delete             Delete a shortcut link

Add tests for these in the `tests.py` file. The file has some initial entries created for you

**Tasks, part 3**: You must implement the following services. You may create any helper functions you like, similar to what we did in the `banking-flask` project.

1. `GET '/'` is meant to return a list of all the available buckets, and it is implemented in the function `bucket_list`. You should return a payload that looks as follows:

    ```json
    {
        "buckets": [
            {
                "link": "/<bucketID>",
                "description": "the bucket description"
            },
            ...
        ]
    }
    ```
    You can use a list comprehension over the result of the database query to create that list of bucket entries. Use `url_for` to create the links.
2. `GET '/<bucketId>'` returns information about a particular bucket. It is implemented in the function `bucket_contents`. Its behavior should be as follows:

    - If the `bucketId` does not match a bucket in the database, return a 404 status code (use `abort` for this and other error behaviors, helper error handlers are provided at the top of the file).
    - Get the request's arguments and check if one of the argument's is a `password` field. If there isn't one, return a `403` status with a message that a password is required.
    - If there is a password field, use the `getHash` function from the utils library to convert this password value into a hash, and compare it to the stored `passwordHash` in the bucket. If they don't match, return a `403` status with a message about incorrect password.
    - If the password does match, then you must return a normal response. Your payload should have the following structure:

        ```json
        {
            "id": "the bucket id",
            "link": "the link back to this bucket, use `url_for`",
            "description": "the bucket's description",
            "shortcuts": [
                {
                    "linkHash": "the linkHash of the shortcut",
                    "link": "link to the shortcut, use `url_for`",
                    "description": "the shortcut description"
                },
                ... more shortcuts here
            ]
        }
        ```
3. `PUT '/<bucketId>'` is used to create a new bucket with a given id provided by the user. It is implemented in the `bucket_create_with_id` function. Its behavior should be as follows:

    - If there is already a bucket with that bucketId, you should return a 403 status, stating that this bucket id already exists.
    - You will need to read the contents of the payload submitted to you, in JSON form. If those contents do not contain a "password" field, you should return a 403 status, stating that a password for the bucket must be provided.
    - If there is a password field, then you should use the `getHash` function from the utils library to convert it into a `linkHash` value. You should also look for a "description" field in the contents of the submitted payload. Then you should use the suitable `db` method to create a bucket with the provided id, linkHash, and description if one was provided, and ask for a commit from the `db` object. You should then return a 201 status, along with a `Location` header whose value should be the `url_for` link to this newly created bucket's GET method. Your body can be an empty JSON (`{}`) or one that has an `"ok"` entry.
4. `POST '/'` is used to create a new bucket with an automatically-generated id. It is implemented by the `bucket_create` function. It behaves similarly to the `PUT` version above, with a small variation:

    - Use the `makeId` function from the `utils` module to generate a random bucket id.
    - Check if a bucket with that id already exists, and if it does keep generating new id's until you find one that doesn't exist already.
    - Return the result of calling the `bucket_create_with_id` function, passing to it the generated id. This will ensure that the rest of the method's behavior follows that of the `PUT` version of creating a bucket.
5. `DELETE '/<bucketId>'` is used to delete a bucket. It is implemented in the `bucket_delete` function. Its behavior should be as follows:

    - Search for a bucket with that id. If there isn't one, return a 404 status.
    - If there is such a bucket, you should look at the parameters/arguments passed along with the DELETE request. If there is no password argument provided, return a 403 error, with a message that a password is required.
    - If a password was provided, use the `getHash` function from the `utils` module to convert the password into a passwordHash. Then check whether this passwordHash matches the one stored in the retrieved bucket. If they do not match, return a 403 error, with a message about an incorrect password.
    - If the passwordHash matches the one from the bucket, then you should ask the database to delete the bucket, then commit. You should then return a 204.
6. `GET '/<bucketId>/<hash>'` is a method used to retrieve a shortcut. It is implemented in the function `shortcut_get_link`. Its behavior should be as follows:

    - Search for a bucket with that id. If there isn't one, return a 404 status.
    - If there is a bucket with that id, then use a suitable db method to search for a shortcut with that linkHash and belonging to that that bucket. If one is not found, then return a 404 status.
    - If such a shortcut is found, then return a `307` response code, indicating a redirect. Set the `Location` header of your response to the `link` value from the shortcut. You must also include a payload with your response, containing:

        ```json
        {
            "hash": "the linkHash",
            "link": "the shortcut target link",
            "description": "the shortcut description"
        }
        ```
7. `PUT '/<bucketId>/<hash>'` is used to create new shortcuts. It is implemented by the function `shortcut_create_with_hash`. Its behavior should be as follows:

    - Search for a bucket with that id. If there isn't one, return a 404 status, with a message mentioning that the bucket id is unknown.
    - Search for an existing shortcut with that link hash and that bucket. If one exists, return a 403, indicating that the hash is already used.
    - If such a shortcut doesn't exist already, then look at the contents of the request. If they don't contain a "password" field, then return a 403 status, with a message about a password being required.
    - If a password field exists, use `getHash` to convert it to a `passwordHash` and test it against the one stored with the bucket. If they don't match, return a 403 status, with a message about an incorrect password.
    - If the `passwordHash` matches the one for the bucket, then create a new shortcut entry using the appropriate `db` method, issue a commit, and return a 201 status code along with a `Location` header pointing to the `url_for` entry for a GET for this shortcut.
8. `POST '/<bucketId>'` can also be used to create new shortcuts, where the client expects the linkHash to be generated by the server. It is implemented by the function `shortcut_create`. Its behavior should be as follows:

    - Use `makeId` to generate a value for `linkHash`.
    - If there is already a shortcut for the provided `bucketId` and the generated `linkHash`, then keep generating new `linkHash`s until that's no longer the case.
    - Return a call to the `shortcut_create_with_hash` function, passing to it the provided `bucketId` and the generated `linkHash`.
9. `DELETE '/<bucketId>/<linkHash>'` is used to delete a shortcut. It is implemented by the `shortcut_delete` function. Its behavior should be as follows:

    - Check if the bucket with that bucketId exists. Return a 404 if it does not exist.
    - Check for an existing shortcut with that bucket and the provided `linkHash`. Return a 404 if it doesn't exist.
    - If the shortcut doesn exist, then look at the request's arguments, for a `password` entry. Return a `403` with a message that a password is required.
    - If a password entry is provided in the request's arguments, then use `makeHash` to convert it to a `passwordHash` and compare it to the bucket's `passwordHash`. If they don't match, return a `403` with a message that the password is incorrect.
    - If the `passwordHash` matches the value in the bucket, then use a suitable `db` method to delete the shortcut, make a commit, and issue a 204 response.
